Is working.
You know, we can use harassment law, intimidation law,
the noise under the summary offenses act,
under the harassment act, even even under the Crimes Act.
We have law that could protect people if some
of these utters actually go too far.
But you need to bear in mind that most
of the time the protest is for a legitimate reason.
And as a public figure, we always have
to expect people protesting outside our private property.
But as long as they're doing it properly
and they're doing it, uh, in a way that is not causing
trouble, then that should be accepted.
That's a limit that we need to accept.
So basically the bill would limit three core rights under
the Bill of Rights, the freedom of expression, freedom
of peaceful assembly, and freedom of movement.
Protecting privacy is important,
but it's not more important than people's right
to speak up and being heard.
There's also really not clear evidence that protest
outside homes are such a problem at the moment in
New Zealand, that we need a new, that we need
to create a new crime for it.
And introducing imprisonment for this kind
of behavior is really, really extreme.
So the other big problem is with the wording.
The bill uses very vague terms like unreasonable disruption.
This could almost mean anything
depending on who's interpreting it.
It could be used to stop a small
or peaceful protest outside for a cause.
We really need to be careful.
And also, another important point I wanted to make is
that the Bill Evans says someone could be guilty if they out
to have known that protest was disruptive.
That is really not fair in criminal law.
You need to be very careful when it comes to wording.
I'll give you one personal example.
Uh, I am originally from Iran, as you all know.
And during the serious human rights abusers in Iran, many
of us in New Zealand have protested against
the Revolutionary Guard.
We have stood outside the Iranian embassy basically
to demand justice and accountability.
I would've been proudly, proudly as a matter of principle
to protest outside the ambassador's residence as well,
which we had his address very peacefully
and respectfully under this bill.
This kind of action could be a criminal offense.
I would hope that you all think I'm not really a criminal,
but I'm trying to make a point here that even
as someone who's educated, who's part of the community,
we have a right to protest for a cause
or for a, for, uh, as a matter of principle.
So look, protests are sometimes uncomfortable.
They are meant to be uncomfortable.
They are meant to challenge and disrupt.
That's what drives the change.
So if this law passes,
people may be too afraid to speak out.
So you're really going to silence minority voices
and I think it's a huge blow
to the Democratic accountability.
So if you are still concerned about these targeted
protests, there are better options.
Use civil injunctions, use trespass notices,
give police a clear guidance on how
to use their existing power.
Let local council deal with noise and obstruction.
As I sit again
and I repeat that, I haven't yet seen clear evidence
as why this is such a big problem that we need new law.
However, if the committee still decides to proceed,
please make it safer and please make it fairer.
Remove imprisonment, keep it only findable.
Require actual intent, not just
because someone out to have known
and clearly define unreasonable disruption
so people actually know what is allowed
and what is not allowed.
And also add a clause confirming the bill must be
interpreted consistently with the Bill of Rights.
So, long story short,
I believe the bill is too broad, too vague,
and too dangerous.
So please, when you're considering our submissions,
be very careful in terms of what's going to come next.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thanks Samara. Um, can I just ask,
you've got the three tests.
You've got engages in demonstration, you've got the, um,
demonstration is directed at regular, uh, occupant,
but the third one, which is what you're talking about,
knows or ought to know.
Are you saying that the clarification if we were
to go down this route should be
that there is a clear intention that you want
to be unreasonable, that's you wanna
cause unreasonable disruption?
That's right. The intent is really important.
And if you like, uh, Andrew, we are quite happy to redraft
that clause to basically clearly say what we have
intended to say here in terms of clear intent
and resend it to the committee.
And is that, is that easier to, um, to prove than
nos or ought to know? Is that good? Say it
Again, Cameron. I think Kevin Andrew
Is it, does that you,
you think if you insert the word intent,
that would be an easier and give more clarity both
to the police and the protestors?
Yeah, absolutely it would.
Okay. Alright. Cool. Any other questions from anyone?
Uh, just one from me. Yeah. Risi
Chair. Yeah. And thank
you Samaria for your submission.
I'm just wondering, as a criminal practitioner,
one of the issues mm-hmm.
Um, I would love your, uh, advice on is the fact
that we may have a situation where there's collective,
a collective act race.
So you may arrive at a protest, um,
and not be the ones disrupting, but be part of.
Mm-hmm. That, um, how, how does
that play out in terms of the criminal law?
And is it problematic in your view?
No, it would be absolutely problematic.
It would be very problematic
because you could be just a bystander, genuinely trying
to have a peaceful protest
and then being involved with, you know, there's always one
or two potentially that could go rogue in these
or come there with a different intention
and you could become part of that.
And what are we gonna end up with?
Ucci, as you know, we are gonna end up
with criminal proceedings,
which will probably get nowhere at the end
because any good lawyer will fight that.
And, uh, we are gonna end up
with a clogged up court proceeding.
Something that we're trying to, we're trying to avoid.
That's why it's quite important to have clear,
clear legislation in place
to avoid those unnecessary proceedings down the track.
Okay, cool. Now I've got, um, Mr. Stevenson, oh, just
Mr. Chair, if it's okay,
I think we should take up Samira's
offer to, for her to send
through Yeah. Some of the wording.
Yeah, I was gonna suggest that. Thank you.
So we, we would like to get your wording around that.
Um, Samara, that'd be Fantasticly, right? Absolutely.
Any other questions from any other members?
Hey, thanks Samara. Uh, that,
that was very helpful actually.
Um, and thank you for joining us this morning. Thank
You very much. All have
a great day. We'll be in touch.
Okay. Hey Te, bye
Right now. Uh, we've
got one more submitter, uh, lo elene, I think
hopefully they're with us.
Good morning, how are you?
I'm well, how are you? Very good, thank you.
Now we've just got five minutes, but um, the floor is yours.
Is it?
Uh, thank you.
Uh, my name is Lo I'm an Armenian American
and I've been living in Al Tera for almost two years now.
Um, and for the last two years I've been watching in horror
as my home country has been descending
into authoritarianism.
I have friends in the US who have been threatened, assaulted
by police and expelled from university simply
for participating in nonviolent protests,
protests against the illegal occupation of Palestine
and against the illegal abducting
and torture of US citizens without trial.
But what does it mean to say
that those actions are illegal when US lawmakers can snap
their fingers and say
that it is actually my peace-loving
friends who are the criminals?
The US claims that it values law and order,
but we can see clear as day
that the United States cracked down on protest,
has made a mockery of the law
and has only caused more chaos across the entire country.
This is the example that New Zealand is trying to follow
with this bill with its vague, unclear wording.
The police could decide one day that a couple
of people gathered on Cuba Street are a disruption
to the people living nearby
and arrest everyone
for exercising their right to free expression.
Is this the kind of community we want to live in
where people are afraid to speak out
because anything they do
or say could be grounds
for arrest depending on the whims of the police?
We've seen the strategy backfire dramatically
and shamefully in the US and UK
and all the while I've been saying, thank God
that New Zealand isn't doing this,
isn't treating people like that.
I thought that this country valued its diverse opinions
and valued its history of anti-nuclear
and anti-apartheid protests.
And now it feels like a punch to the gut
to see New Zealand follow the script
that America has written when we all know
that it will only lead to repression and authoritarianism.
I hope that New Zealand will change course
and listen to the people.
Unfortunately, parliament didn't listen to the thousands
of people who oppose the Fast Track bill
or to the 98%
of submissions against the regulatory standards bill.
But over the last few weeks, you've all been hearing
so many reasons why this bill is a threat
to people's freedoms and wellbeing.
And I hope that this will not be another example
of New Zealand parliament refusing to listen to the people
that they are meant to represent.
I think having listened to a lot of the
previous submissions, I think a lot of members
of parliament are probably scared that they are going to be
targeted by protestors.
You might be worried that some people are going to chant
outside your house and interrupt your sleep,
but try for a moment to empathize
with the normal everyday people
who you are meant to represent.
If it was your family in Gaza being bombed,
wouldn't you want people to protest to stop it?
If it was your neighborhood getting flooded
because of climate change, wouldn't you want people
to protest to stop it?
And if it was you and the people you love being portrayed
as criminals simply for having the bravery to stand up for
what is right, wouldn't you want
to stop this bill from passing?
But let me tell you, even despite all the chaos
and repression and governmental overreach in the
United States last week, I watched Zoran Momani get elected
as mayor of New York City
and he said, quote, we chose hope together,
hope over tyranny, hope over big money
and small ideas, hope over despair.
He said that politics should be something
that we all do together, not something that is done to us.
So I believe that in the US
and in New Zealand, it is more critical than ever
to up uplift people's voices rather than criminalizing them.
As this bill is trying to do.
The people of New Zealand deserve the right
to speak up when something is wrong.
And they are speaking now saying that this bill is wrong
and will set us down a
concerning path towards even more
restrictions and regressions.
I hope that you members of Parliament will listen
and protect the right to protest.
I hope that you do not pass this bill
and I hope that you help set us on a path to peace
and justice instead of authoritarianism. Kiara,
Hey, thank you very much for that.
Um, members, any questions from anyone?
I don't think so. Hey, thank you though.
That doesn't mean that it's not, uh, of importance.
We've just had a lot of submissions as you're aware.
But, uh, thank you very much, very much
and um, it's nice that you joined us this morning
and apologize for, uh, deferring you last week.
Um, uh, that's the way parliament works.
So thank you for joining us again. Okay, thank you. Thank
The opportunity to speak Right now members.
I think that's it. Um, so we can now,
um, adjourn the meeting.
Is that right, ed?
That would be my advice.
Unless members had anything else they wanted
to talk about, we could adjourn,
Um, but we'd have to go into private.
I think we've done that. We'd prefer that other matter.
So yep. Right. Members, I'll see you, um, uh, tomorrow
and on Thursday obviously.
Thanks very much. Cheers.